---
title: last.fm Hack Day 2008
author: maryrosecook
layout: post
permalink: /post/last-fm-hack-day-2008-2
categories:
  - Uncategorized
---
Sunday was hack day.

I arrived about ten and stood with lots of other people outside the venue.&nbsp; I smoked a cigarette.&nbsp; I sipped my coffee.

We went in and found places to sit on sofas, at tables, in corners.&nbsp; Some guy from Microsoft said something, and then the programming began.

I did two hacks.

For my first, I added [last.fm][1] to [the perceptron][2] as a new recommendation data source.&nbsp; My MacBook spent a lot of time pulling recommendations via the last.fm API and crunching data.&nbsp; the perceptron tracks user behaviour in order to determine the quality of its data sources.&nbsp; The top two, Tiny Mix Tapes reviewer recommendations and Epitonic writer recommendations, have a weighting of around 33% each.&nbsp; Poor old last.fm has only a 5% weight.&nbsp; However, in fairness, the perceptron favours the niche, whereas last.fm is a lot more comprehensive.&nbsp; Further, there are a lot of new bands in the database that haven&#8217;t had time to accrue points for the last.fm data source.

My [second hack][3] was quite mini. It takes your last.fm username and tells you where you should be living, based on where your favourite bands are playing the most gigs.&nbsp; I should move to New York City.

At 7pm, bolstered by free food and a free bar, people did demos.&nbsp; Two highlights:

[Songcolours][4]. This takes your last.fm username and shows you colours and words from the lyrics of your favourite songs.&nbsp; Very tretty.

StaffWars.&nbsp; This uses some program that allows you to pipe music from your computer to a set of speakers.&nbsp; With StaffWars, if a challenger to the current piper can correctly answer an automatically generated musical trivia question, they can take control of the speakers.

It really was a good day.&nbsp; I met lots of lovely people and had a splendid time.&nbsp; Thanks so much to the last.fm guys for hosting the event.

 [1]: http://last.fm
 [2]: http://theperceptron.com
 [3]: http://theperceptron.com/lab/where_to_live
 [4]: http://playground.audioscrobbler.com/matt/hackday/?user=maryrosecook